"officer[] training" in "battle craft" and "weapons." CC-1 was employed at all times relevant to
also has referenced previously serving in India's Central Reserve Police Force, and receiving
"Senior Field Officer" with responsibilities in "Security Management" and "Intelligence." CC-1
enforcement detected and disrupted the plot to murder the Victim.
government has banned the Victim and his separatist organization from India. U.S. law
to secede from India and establish a Sikh sovereign state called K.halistan, and the Indian
ethnoreligious minority group in India. The Victim has publicly called for some or all of Punjab
secession of Punjab, a state in nmihern India that is home to a large population of Sikhs, an
vocal critic of the Indian government and leads a U.S.-based organization that advocates for the
who is a U.S. citizen oflndian origin residing in New York City (the "Victim"). The Victim is a
defendant ("GUPTA"), directed a plot to assassinate, on U.S. soil, an attorney and political activist,
together with others in India and elsewhere, including NIK.HIL GUPTA, a/k/a "Nick," the
SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK
UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
NIKHIL GUPTA,
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
2.
1.
a/Ida "Nick,"
CC-1 has variously described being employed by the Indian government as a
Earlier this year, an identified Indian government employee ("CC-1 "), working
Defendant.
V.
BACKGROUND
Overview
S 1 23 Cr. 289 (VM)
INDICTMENT
SEALED SUPERSEDING
to occur in the ensuing weeks between high-level U.S. and Indian government officials.
instmcted the UC not to commit the murder around the time of anticipated engagements scheduled
GUPTA directed the UC to cany out the murder as soon as possible, but GUPTA also specifically
CC-I, among other things, surveillance photographs of the Victim that the UC had sent to GUPTA.
updates on the progress of the assassination plot, which GUPTA accomplished by forwarding to
day conduct- which GUPTA then passed to the UC. CC-1 directed GUPTA to provide regular
New York City, phone numbers associated with the Victim, and details about the Victim's day-to-
GUPTA with personal information about the Victim- including the Victim's home address in
payment for the murder.
for an associate to deliver $15,000 in cash to the UC in Manhattan, New York, as an advance
pay the UC $100,000 to murder the Victim. On or about June 9, 2023, CC-1 and GUPTA arranged
enforcement officer (the "UC"). CC-1 subsequently agreed, in dealings brokered by GUPTA, to
City. The CS introduced GUPTA to a purported hitman, who was in fact an undercover U.S. law
enforcement (the "CS"), for assistance in contracting a hitman to murder the Victim in New York
be a criminal associate, but who was in fact a confidential source working with U.S. law
trafficking in his communications with CC-1 and others.
associate of CC-1 and has described his involvement in international narcotics and weapons
the Victim in the United States. GUPTA, an Indian national who also resides in India, is an
India.
this Indictment by the Indian government, resides in India, and directed the assassination plot from
5.
4.
3.
In or about May 2023, CC-1 recruited GUPTA to orchestrate the assassination of
In or about June 2023, in furtherance of the assassination plot, CC-1 provided
At CC-1 's direction, GUPTA contacted an individual whom GUPTA believed to
2
to their electronic communications, GUPTA also met CC-1 in-person in New Delhi in furtherance
criminal case against GUPTA in India. GUPTA agreed to orchestrate the assassination. In addition
arrange the murder of the Victim in exchange for CC-1 's assistance in securing the dismissal of a
communications between CC-1 and GUPTA over enc1ypted applications, CC-1 asked GUPTA to
request of the United States in connection with his participation in the plot to murder the Victim.
Victim and messaged GUPTA, " [i]t's [a] priority now."
on killing the Victim. On or about June 20, 2023, CC-1 sent GUPTA a news article about the
many targets."1 GUPTA added that, in light ofNijjar's murder, there was "now no need to wait"
after the Nijjar murder, GUPTA told the UC that Nijjar "was also the target" and "we have so
the street address of the Victim's residence in New York City. On or about June 19, 2023, the day
that showed Nijjar's bloody body slumped in his vehicle; about an hour later, CC-1 sent GUPTA
government. Later that evening, just hours after the Nijjar mlll·der, CC-1 sent GUPTA a video clip
Victim, was a leader of the Sikh separatist movement and an outspoken critic of the Indian
a Sikh temple in British Columbia, Canada. Nijjar was an associate of the Victim, and like the
indicated.
Grammatical and typographical enors appear as in the original commwtlcations unless otherwise
and in part, and are based on draft transcriptions and (where necessaty) English translations.
GUPTA sometimes left CC-1 voice notes in Hindi. All communications are described in substance
with occasional Spanish phrases. GUPTA and CC-1 largely communicated in English, and
1 GUPTA and the UC communicated in English. GUPTA and the CS communicated in English
of the plot.
6.
8.
7.
Beginning in or about early May 2023, in a series of telephonic and electronic
On or about June 30, 2023, GUPTA was a.nested in the Czech Republic at the
On or about June 18, 2023, masked gunmen murdered Hardeep Singh Nijjar outside
CC-1 Recruits GUPTA to Arrange the Victim's Murder
3
Protocol data, accessed the Internet during the period of the murder plot on numerous occasions
by CC-1 has an India country code and is registered to an email account that, based on Internet
target in "California." GUPTA replied: ''We will hit our all Targets." The telephone number used
few minutes later, CC-1 messaged GUPTA that CC-1 had a "target in New York" and another
encrypted messaging application, CC-1 wrote GUPTA: "This is [CC-1]. .. Save my name as [CC-
2 Gujarat is a state in western India.
communications with the CS and later the UC, including by phone, video, and text message, during
The CS responded that he would reach out to his contacts.
victim was a lawyer who split time between New York City and another U.S. city ("U.S. City-I").
willing to carry out a murder-for-hire in the United States. GUPTA explained that the intended
or about May 29, 2023, GUPTA asked the CS by phone if the CS knew anyone who would be
Commissioner of Police.
arrange a meeting between GUPTA and a "DCP," which is an acronym used in India for Deputy
[case]," that it was "all clear," and "nobody will ever bother you again." CC-1 further offered to
23, 2023, CC-1 again assured GUPTA that CC-1 had "spoke[n] with the boss about your Gujarat
already been taken care of," and .that "nobody from Gujrat _police is calling."2 On or about May
government agency as set forth above.
from the vicinity of New Delhi, where CC-1 worked during the relevant time period for an Indian
1 Alias]." GUPTA saved the telephone number on GUPTA's phone under an alias for CC-1. A
9.
12.
11.
10.
On or about May 12, 2023, CC-1 notified GUPTA that his criminal case "has
On or about May 6, 2023, at the outset of their conversation over a particular
Over the ensuing weeks, GUPTA engaged in a series of electronic and recorded
Following CC-1 's assurances, GUPTA pressed forward to arrange the murder. On
4
which they discussed, among other things, the logistics and price of the murder. For example,
murder plot, stating "[i]t's important and less time." GUPTA responded that he expected to have
City, which CC-1 described to GUPTA as "the locality of [the Victim's] House."
or about June 1, 2023, CC-1 sent GUPTA the street address for the Victim's home in New York
was not possible, "the whole money will be paid with in [sic] 24 hours after the work is done." On
the CS requesting "100 k." CC-I responded "Ok," and then added that while an advance payment
murder ("the work") and executing the plot quickly. GUPTA replied to CC-1 with a screenshot of
depending upon the quality of the work ... and if it's done as soon as possible," referring to the
killing the Victim. CC-1 responded that "we a.re ready to pay $150000 ... the offer will go higher
messages with the CS, in which the CS requested details about the Victim and about payment for
payment for the murder.
response, the CS asked GUPTA for additional information about the Victim and details about
information about the Victim, and advised that the Victim spent most of his time in New York. In
offices. On or about May 29, 2023, GUPTA messaged the CS the Victim's name and other
CS to a website where the CS could find New York and U.S. City-I addresses for the Victim's
to lure the Victim to a place where he could be more easily executed. GUPTA also directed the
that the CS' s associates could contact the Victim under the guise of obtaining legal advice in order
during a video call, GUPTA reminded the CS that the Victim worked as a lawyer and suggested
him brother, finish him, don't take too much time ... push these guys, push these guys .. . , finish
by audio call, and urged the CS to have his associates cany out the murder soon, stating: "finish
an update the following day. The next day, on or about June 3, 2023, GUPTA spoke with the CS
14.
13.
On or about June 2, 2023, CC-1 messaged GUPTA, asking for "any update" on the
On or about May 29, 2023, GUPTA sent screenshots to CC-1 of GUPTA's text
5
further noted that GUPTA would be speaking with those directing the murder.
"if this job is done successfully" then GUPTA would "bring the chief' to meet the CS. GUPTA
or about June 4, 2023, GUPTA again spoke with the CS by audio call, and promised the CS that
with the NY group" and "told them they have to discharge [the Victim] as soon as possible.'' On
surveillance of the Victim. Later that day, GUPTA messaged CC-1 that GUPTA had "spoke[n]
asked the CS to have the CS's associates in New York use the GPS Application to transmit
Application"), which CC-1 had previously sent to GUPTA on or about May 25, 2023, and GUPTA
Positioning System ("GPS") coordinates and enables the user to take photographs (the "GPS
the job." GUPTA directed the CS to a particular cellphone application that records Global
touch with the CS's New York associates who would receive the advance payment and cany out
if he can an-ange the 25k [payment] there."
a screenshot of the CS's messages to CC-1. GUPTA asked CC-1 to "check with [his] NY dealer
advance payment of $25,000. On or about June 5, 2023, GUPTA sent the Surveillance Photo and
were monitoring the Victim and that the Victim would be killed as soon as they received an
GUPTA via text message that the Surveillance Photo was proof that the CS' s New York associates
of the Victim taken using the GPS Application (the "Surveillance Photo"). The CS represented to
cash to the UC in Manhattan, as an advance payment for the murder of the Victim.
the CS for the murder. As set forth below, CC-1 and GUPTA ananged the payment of $15,000 in
assassination as soon as possible, CC-1 and GUPTA offered to make an upfront cash payment to
17.
16.
15.
As their plotting continued, and CC-1 and GUPTA sought to orchestrate the
On or about June 6, 2023, GUPTA messaged the CS asking to be put directly in
On or about June 4, 2023, the CS sent GUPTA a purported surveillance photograph
CC-1 and GUPTA Make an Advance Payment fo1· the Murder
6
have the funds available in New York to make the advance payment, and asked that CC-1 check
introducing the UC. CC-1 replied "Ok bhaiji."3
screenshots to CC-1 of GUPTA's messages with the CS discussing the advance payment and
the UC, who was purpo1ting to be the CS's associate in New York. That same day, GUPTA sent
the murder of the Victim. In response, the CS introduced GUPTA through electronic messages to
GUPTA and facilitated a video call between GUPTA and Individual-2, dw-ing which GUPTA and
the Advance Payment. During the meeting, which took place in the UC's vehicle, the UC called
UC and stated that Individual-2 had $15,000 for the UC.
payment for the murder (the "Advance Payment"). A few minutes later, Individual-2 called the
GUPTA to arrange the delivery by noon that day of the "parcel," meaning the advance cash
informed the UC by text message and voice note that another associate ("Individual-2") would call
ensuing weekend. GUPTA responded in the affirmative. Approximately two hours later, GUPTA
the team and get it done this weekend," referring to executing the murder of the Victim during the
communication with [Indi vidual-1], he said payment will be made today positively .. Let's activate
number for Individual-I with an Indian country code.
June 8, 2023, CC-1 replied to GUPTA with the name of an associate ("Individual-I"), and a phone
with his contact. GUPTA added that he could "pay here in Delhi also." The next day, on or about
3 "Bhai ji" is a respectful Hindi term for "brother."
20.
19.
18.
Onor about June 7, 2023, GUPTA messaged CC-1 that GUPTA's associate did not
Later, on or about June 9, 2023, Individual-2 met with the UC in Manhattan to make
On or about June 9, 2023, CC-1 messaged GUPTA, "Bhai ji I guess you are in
7
$15,000 in cash to the UC. A still image of the Advance Payment is shown below.
Individual-2 discussed, among other things, GUPTA's location in India. Individual-2 then handed
because of such engagements scheduled to occur over the ensuing weeks. GUPTA explained that,
2023, on an audio call, GUPTA instructed the CS that "we need to calm down everything 10 days"
level government officials from the United States and India. For example, on or about June 6,
instructed the CS not to carry out the assassination during anticipated engagements between high-
Payment had been made. CC-1 responded, "Ok bhai ji."
message conversations with the CS and the UC, in which both confirmed that the Advance
given the Victim's public profile as an activist, there could be protests in the wake of his death,
CC-1 and GUPTA Instruct That the Murder Should Not Occur During Anticipated High-
22.
21.
Level Diplomatic Engagements Between India and the United States
As they plotted the murder of the Victim, GUPTA specifically and repeatedly
On or about June 10, 2023, GUPTA sent to CC-1 screenshots of GUPTA's text
8
planned engagements between high-level U.S. and Indian government officials. For example, on
of the Victim to be carried out in the future.
engagements, there would be "more jobs, more jobs," referring to more targeted killings like that
assassinated on U.S. soil during those planned meetings. GUPTA added that after the planned
which could lead to "political things," referring to geopolitical fallout if the Victim were
GUPTA's confederates would provide the CS and the UC with additional victims to kill. For
from CC-1, stating: "follow [the Victim] till the time he enters his house or any other final place."
from our friends for you brother." GUPTA then forwarded a message that GUPTA bad received
days later, on or about June 14, 2023, GUPTA messaged the UC that GUPTA had a "m[essage]
the camera back toward himself, he told the UC "we are all counting on you." Approximately two
were dressed in business attire, sitting around a conference table with GUPTA. As GUPTA turned
During the call, GUPTA tumed the camera toward approximately three other men in the room who
12, 2023, the UC received a video call from GUPTA, who appeared to be in a conference room.
resources and were closely monitoring the progress of the plotting. For example, on or about June
emphasized that his co-conspirators directing the assassination plot from India had extensive
if it doesn't happen today it will be done after 24th," that is, after the engagements.
photographs of the Victim, CC-I messaged Gupta: "It looks promising .. but we have today only ..
or about June 11, 2023, after receiving from GUPTA additional purported surveillance
GUPTA not to carry out the assassination of the Victim in the immediate lead-up to, or during, the
GUPTA Informs the CS and the UC that His India-Based Co-Conspirators Directing the
23.
2~.
24.
Murder Plot Were Targeting Other Victims, Including in Canada
Consistent with the instructions that GUPTA relayed to the CS, CC-1 instructed
GUPTA also informed the CS and the UC that after the murder of the Victim,
During GUPTA's communications with the CS and the UC, GUPTA repeatedly
9
"we will be needing one good team in Canada also, [t]omorrow I will share you the details.,, The
"big target" in Canada. A few days later, on or about June 14, 2023, GUPTA messaged the CS that
every month 2-3 job."
would change the UC's life because "we will give more bigger job more, more job every month,
example, on or about June 9, 2023, GUPTA told the CS during a call that the mw-der of the Victim
targets. But the good news is this, the good news is this: now no need to wait." Separately, GUPTA
was "#4, #3" on the list, and "not to worry [because] we have so many targets, we have so many
with the UC by audio call, and GUPTA told the UC that Nijjar "was also the target" but that Nijjar
UC minutes after receiving it from CC-1. Soon after, on or about June 19, 2023, GUPTA spoke
address of the Victim's residence in New York City.
you do not get involved in action." Approximately one hour later, CC-1 sent GUPTA the street
for permission to "go to the field." CC-1 responded that "secrecy [is] important," and "(i]t's better
vehicle. GUPTA replied that he wished he had personally conducted the killing and asked CC-1
Later that evening, CC-1 sent GUPTA a video clip showing Nijjar's bloody body slumped in his
the Victim and another leader of the Sikh separatist movement, outside a Sikh temple in Canada.
York [and] Canada 0ob]," referring to the individuals directing the targeting plots from India.
with the CS, GUPTA told the CS that "we are doing their job, brother. We are doing their New
"waiting [for] the details" about the Canadian target. On or about June 16, 2023, on another call
following day, on or about June 15, 2023, GUPTA advised the CS by phone that GUPTA was still
Nijjar Is Murdered in Canada, and CC-1 and GUPTA Accelerate the Plan to Kill the
26.
28.
27.
On or about June 12, 2023, on a call with the CS, GUPTA stated that there was a
GUPTA forwarded the video clip showing Nijjar's bloody body to the CS and the
On or about June 18, 2023, masked gunmen shot and killed Nijjar, an associate of
Victim in New York City
10
you the video .... We didn't give to [the UC] this job, so some other guy did this job ... in
GUPTA had previously mentioned as the potential Canadian "job" stating: "This is the guy, I send
also held an audio call with the CS, during which GUPTA confirmed that Nijjar was the target that
on the progress of the plot to murder the Victim, which GUPTA then reported to CC-1. GUPTA
i.e., the Victim and, after that, "three in Canada."
and to "do it quicldy." GUPTA stated that before the "29th [of June] we have to finish four jobs,"
to the CS by audio call, and GUPTA directed the CS to "find the opportunity" to kill the Victim
about the Victim. CC-1 then messaged: "It's [a] priority now." Shortly thereafter, GUPTA spoke
. . put everyone down, put eve1yone down."
GUPTA added: "Ifhe is not alone, [if] there are two guys with him in the meeting or something .
you the video. So he will be more cautious, so we should not give them the chance, any chance."
"He will be more cautious, because in Canada, his colleague is down. His colleague is down. I sent
GUPTA also told the CS to expect the Victim to be more careful in the wake of the Nijjar murder:
go anytime, even today, tomorrow- as early as possible. [The UC] has to finish this job, brother."
the UC should kill the Victim as soon as possible, informing the CS that "we got the go-ahead to
engagements between high-level U.S. and Indian government officials, GUPTA told the CS that
Canada." In a change from his prior insttuction to delay killing the Victim until after the scheduled
attempted to call the UC. When the call went unanswered, GUPTA messaged the UC that the
that "[h]e is not at home," and that CC-1 "got the message from boss." GUPTA immediately
point, on or about June 22, 2023, CC-1 messaged GUPTA that the Victim "is somewhere else,"
simultaneously relayed intelligence on the Victim's whereabouts from CC-1 to the UC. At one
30.
29.
CC-1 and GUPTA Continue Working to Orchestrate the Victim's Murder
After the Nijjar murder in Canada, GUPTA demanded rapid updates from the UC
The following day, on or about June 20, 2023, CC-1 sent GUPTA a news article
11
team if they are sending location." Consistent with CC-1 's instruction, GUPTA messaged the UC
Application. CC-1 explained that "[n]ow it's a clear go ahead .. we will also be able to help your
App based location pie," referring to obtaining surveillance of the Victim using the GPS
residence.
to giving the green light to assassinate the Victim as soon as it could be verified that he was at his
own ... if they are able to get some proof that he is inside .. it will be a go ahead from us," a reference
inside." A few minutes later, CC-1 messaged GUPTA, instructing: "let them also verify by their
Victim "is not at home according to our sources ... [m]ake sw-e his presence before entering
UC that "[w]e have the Intel that the [Victim] .. . has arrived back to his home" and "[t]oday he
"[p]ersonal" telephone numbers of the Victim. On or about June 29, 2023, GUPTA messaged the
the photographs to CC-1, who then provided GUPTA with a total of four "[o]ffice" and
of the Victim's neighborhood taken using the GPS Application. GUPTA transmitted portions of
visit."
CC-1 's instruction, directing the UC to "keep eyes at his house, his office and the cafe he used to •
office," and that GUPTA should tell the UC "to be ready for both the locations." GUPTA relayed
"[t]he coming 24 hours will be crucial," that the Victim "will definitely come to either home or
to GUPTA: "Excellent ... [t]hey are proving that they are quite serious now." CC-1 added that
sent po1tions of the photographs to CC-1. The next day, on or about June 26, 2023, CC-1 replied
neighborhood, which bore GPS coordinate stamps from the GPS Application. GUPTA, in turn,
2023, the UC sent GUPTA a series of photographs of the vicinity of the Victim's residence and
and directed the UC to transmit "[p]ictures only through the application." On or about June 25,
31.
32.
On or about June 24, 2023, CC-1 messaged GUPTA that "today we must get the
Also onor about June ~6, 2023, the UC sent GUPTA another series of photographs
12
should come out definitely." GUPTA instructed the UC to carry out the murder, stating: "[t]ry to
and foreign commerce, with intent that a murder be committed in violation of the laws of a State
foreign commerce, and to use and cause another person to use the mail and a facility of interstate
agreed together and with each other to travel in and cause another person to travel in interstate and
others known and unknown, willfully and knowingly combined, conspired, confederated, and
Southern District of New York and elsewhere, NIK.BIL GUPTA, a/k/a "Nick," the defendant, and
repeated and realleged as if fully set forth herein.
assassinate the Victim.
authorities at the request of the United States, in connection with his participation in the plot to
Upon his arrival in the Czech Republic, GUPTA was arrested by Czech law enforcement
get this done if you have the visuals and if you are sure."
to carry out a plot directed from India to hire hitmen to assassinate the Victim in the United States,
agreement to pay, a thing of pecuniru.y value, to wit, GUPTA, CC-1, and others worked together
and the United States as consideration for the receipt of, and as consideration for a promise and
33.
35.
34.
The Grand Jury charges:
From at least in or about May 2023 through at least in or about June 2023, in the
The allegations contained in paragraphs 1 tlu·ough 33 of this Indictment are
On or about June 30, 2023, GUPTA traveled from India to the Czech Republic.
GUPTA Is Arrested in the Czech Republic
STATUTORY ALLEGATIONS
(Murder-for-Hire Conspiracy)
COUNT ONE
13
$15,000 advance cash payment for the murder in Manhattan, New York.
used cellphones to communicate in furtherance of the scheme, and arranged for the delive1y of a
the murder in Manhattan, New York.
furtherance of the scheme, and arranged for the delivery of a $15,000 advance cash payment for
hire hitmen to assassinate the Victim in the United States, used cellphones to communicate in
same, to wit, GUPTA, CC-1, and others worked together to carry out a plot directed from India to
agreement to pay, a thing of pecuniary value, and attempted to commit and aided and abetted the
and the United States as consideration for the receipt of, and as consideration for a promise and
and foreign commerce, with intent that a murder be committed in violation of the laws of a State
foreign commerce, and used and caused another person to use the mail and a facility of interstate
others known and unknown, traveled in and caused another person to travel in interstate and
Southern District of New York and elsewhere, NIK.BIL GUPTA, a/k/a ''Nick," the defendant, and
repeated and realleged as if fully set forth herein.
pursuant to Title 18, United States Code, Section 98l(a)(l)(C), and Title 28, United States Code,
Indictment, NIKHIL GUPTA, a/k/a "Nick," the defendant, shall forfeit to the United States,
37.
36.
The Grand Jmy further charges:
38.
As a result of committing the offenses alleged in Counts One and Two of this
From at least in or about May 2023 through at least in or about June 2023, in the
The allegations contained in paragraphs 1 through 33 of this Indictment are
(Title 18, United States Code, Sections 1958 and 2.)
(Title 18, United States Code, Section 1958.)
FORFEITURE ALLEGATION
(Murder-for-Hire)
COUNT TWO
14
defendant up to the value of the above forfeitable property.
Title 28, United States Code, Section 2461(c), to seek forfeiture of any other property of the
it is the intent of the United States, pursuant to Title 21, United States Code, Section 853(p), and
of the defendant:
offenses.
in United States currency representing the amount of proceeds traceable to the commission of said
proceeds traceable to the commission of said offenses, including but not limited to a sum of money
Section 2461(c), any and all property, real and pel'sonal, that constitutes or is derived from
39.
e.
d.
c.
b.
a.
If any of the above-described forfeitable property, as a result of any act or omission
without difficulty;
has been commingled with other property which cannot be subdivided
has been substantially diminished in value; or
has been placed beyond the jurisdiction of the Court;
has been transferred or sold to, or deposited with, a t.lurd person;
cannot be located upon the exercise of due diligence;
Title 21, United States Code, Section 853; and
Title 28, United States Code, Section 2461.)
(Title 18, United States Code, Section 981;
Substitute Assets Provision
15
United States Attorney
DAMIAN WILLIAMS