CASE 0:06-cr-00130-DSD-JJG   Document 65   Filed 08/01/06   Page 1 of 3
UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
DISTRICT OF MINNESOTA
Criminal No. 06-130(1)(DSD/JJG)
United States of America,
Plaintiff,
v.
ORDER
Carlos Meza Guillermo,
Defendant.
This matter is before the court upon defendant Carlos Meza
Guillermo’s objections to the report and recommendation of United
States Magistrate Judge Jeanne J. Graham, dated June 22, 2006.  In
her report, the magistrate judge recommends that defendant’s
motions to suppress eyewitness identifications and evidence be
denied.  After a de novo review of the file and record, the court
adopts the magistrate judge’s report and recommendation in its
entirety.
Defendant objects to the recommendation to deny his motion to
suppress evidence obtained as a result of a search of his person
that occurred after a traffic stop of the vehicle he was driving.
The magistrate judge concluded that, even if the initial detention
or subsequent scope of defendant’s detention was illegal, the
evidence is admissible because defendant consented to the search.
Defendant argues that any consent he gave was not voluntary or a
sufficient act of free will to purge the taint of the illegal
detention.  The court finds, however, that the magistrate judge
CASE 0:06-cr-00130-DSD-JJG   Document 65   Filed 08/01/06   Page 2 of 3
correctly concluded that defendant’s consent to the search was
voluntary and a sufficient act of free will.
As to voluntariness, the magistrate judge properly applied the
factors.  See United States v. Perry, 437 F.3d 782, 785 (8th Cir.
2006) (describing factors to consider).  Defendant asserts that the
magistrate judge failed to note that the officer took and held
defendant’s driver’s license while conferring with narcotics
officers who had arrived.  However, the court finds that any
retention of the driver’s license was brief and did not render
defendant’s subsequent consent to a search involuntary.
As to whether defendant’s consent was a sufficient act of free
will, the magistrate judge properly looked to the close temporal
proximity between any illegal detention and the consent, the lack
of intervening circumstances and the lack of official misconduct.
See id.  Defendant objects to the magistrate judge’s analysis and
requests that the court conduct another hearing in order to view a
video tape of the stop because the tape “is crucial and the best
evidence available.”  (Def.’s Objs. at 3.)  However, defendant does
not explain how or whether the video tape contradicts the evidence
already in the record and upon which the magistrate judge relied.
The court finds that the magistrate judge correctly applied the
facts to the law and that another hearing is unnecessary.
For all of the above reasons, the magistrate judge correctly
concluded that defendant’s motion should be denied.  Therefore,
2
CASE 0:06-cr-00130-DSD-JJG   Document 65   Filed 08/01/06   Page 3 of 3
after a de novo review of the file and record, the court adopts the
report and recommendation of the magistrate judge [Docket No. 60]
in its entirety.  Accordingly, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that:
1.
Defendant’s motion to suppress eyewitness identifications
[Docket No. 39] is denied as moot.
2.
Defendant’s motion to suppress evidence [Docket No. 45]
is denied.
Dated:  August 1, 2006
s/David S. Doty
David S. Doty, Judge
United States District Court
3